>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, APRIL 30:
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP DEFENDS
HIS FIRST 14 WEEKS IN OFFICE AND
LOOKS AHEAD.
ALSO, HOW MANY OF THOSE DETAINED
IN RECENT IMMIGRATION RAIDS HAVE
A CRIMINAL RECORD?
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
USING DRONES TO PREVENT
DANGEROUS ENCOUNTERS BETWEEN
ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS PROMISING
ACTION ON TAX REFORM AND HEALTH
CARE.
IN AN INTERVIEW TAPED YESTERDAY
AND BROADCAST TODAY ON CBS "FACE
THE NATION," THE PRESIDENT SAID
THE REVENUE LOSSES FROM HIS PLAN
TO REDUCE PERSONAL AND CORPORATE
TAX RATES WILL BE OFFSET BY
ECONOMIC GROWTH, BETTER TRADE
DEALS, AND-- HE SEEMED TO
SUGGEST-- A NEW TAX ON IMPORTS.
>> WE HAVE COUNTRIES WHERE IF WE
MAKE A PRODUCT, AND WE SEND IT
TO THAT COUNTRY, THEY CHARGE US
100% TAX.
IF THEY MAKE THE SAME PRODUCT
AND SEND IT TO US, WE CHARGE
THEM NOTHING.
YOU THINK THAT'S SMART?
IT'S NOT, WE'RE GOING TO COME UP
WITH RECIPROCAL TAXES AND LOTS
OF OTHER THINGS ON THOSE
COUNTRIES.
>> Sreenivasan: MISTER TRUMP
PREDICTED HIS SECOND TRY AT
REPEALING AND REPLACING
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT WILL GET APPROVED"
QUICKLY."
HE SAID IT WILL MAINTAIN THE
REQUIREMENT THAT INSURANCE
COMPANIES COVER PEOPLE WITH PRE-
EXISTING MEDICAL CONDITIONS, AND
AT THE SAME TIME, DRIVE DOWN
INSURANCE PREMIUMS AND
DEDUCTIBLES.
WITH NO MAJOR LEGISLATION PASSED
YET, THE PRESIDENT WAS ASKED
WHAT HE'S LEARNED SO FAR ON THE
JOB.
>> IT'S JUST A VERY, VERY
BUREAUCRATIC SYSTEM.
I THINK THE RULES IN CONGRESS
AND IN PARTICULAR THE RULES IN
THE SENATE ARE UNBELIEVABLY
ARCHAIC AND SLOW MOVING.
AND IN MANY CASES, UNFAIR.
IN MANY CASES, YOU'RE FORCED TO
MAKE DEALS THAT ARE NOT THE DEAL
YOU'D MAKE.
>> Sreenivasan: INSTEAD OF
ATTENDING THE ANNUAL WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENTS DINNER LAST
NIGHT, THE PRESIDENT HELD A
CAMPAIGN-STYLE RALLY IN
PENNSYLVANIA TO MARK HIS FIRST
100 DAYS, TELLING SUPPORTERS
HE'LL KEEP PUSHING CONGRESS TO
FUND A CORE CAMPAIGN PROMISE-- A
WALL ALONG THE U.S./MEXICO
BORDER.
>> YEAR AFTER YEAR, YOU PLEADED
FOR WASHINGTON TO ENFORCE OUR
LAWS AS ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION
SURGED.
YOUR PLEAS HAVE FINALLY BEEN--
OH DON'T WORRY, WE ARE GOING TO
HAVE THE WALL.
DON'T WORRY ABOUT IT.
>> Sreenivasan: DONALD TRUMP IS
THE FIRST PRESIDENT SINCE RONALD
REAGAN IN 1981 TO SKIP THE
ANNUAL WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENTS DINNER.
AT THE TIME, MISTER REAGAN WAS
RECOVERING FROM BEING SHOT IN AN
ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT.
AT THE DINNER LAST NIGHT,
JOURNALISTS BOB WOODWARD AND
CARL BERNSTEIN DESCRIBED WHAT
THEY LEARNED REPORTING ON
PRESIDENT NIXON'S "WATERGATE"
SCANDAL.
>> UNREASONABLE GOVERNMENT
SECRECY IS THE ENEMY, AND
USUALLY THE GIVEAWAY ABOUT WHAT
THE REAL STORY MIGHT BE.
AND WHEN LYING, LYING IS
COMBINED WITH SECRECY, THERE IS
USUALLY A PRETTY GOOD ROAD-MAP
IN FRONT OF US.
>> Sreenivasan: THE
CORRESPONDENTS ASSOCIATION
PRESIDENT DEFENDED NEWS
ORGANIZATIONS FROM THE CONSTANT
BARBS FROM THE WHITE HOUSE.
>> IT IS OUR JOB TO REPORT ON
FACTS, AND TO HOLD LEADERS
ACCOUNTABLE.
THAT IS WHO WE ARE.
WE ARE NOT FAKE NEWS.
WE ARE NOT FAILING NEWS
ORGANIZATIONS, AND WE ARE NOT
THE ENEMY OF THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE."
>> Sreenivasan: AND THE FEATURED
ENTERTAINER, "DAILY SHOW"
COMEDIAN HASAN MINHAJ, JOKED
ABOUT THE ABSENCE OF THE USUAL
GUEST OF HONOR.
>> THE LEADER OF OUR COUNTRY IS
NOT HERE.
AND THAT'S BECAUSE HE LIVES IN
MOSCOW.
IT'S A VERY LONG FLIGHT.
IT'D BE A HARD FOR VLAD TO MAKE
IT.
VLAD CAN'T JUST MAKE IT ON A
SATURDAY; IT'S A SATURDAY!
AS FOR THE OTHER GUY, I THINK HE
IS IN PENNSYLVANIA BECAUSE HE
CAN'T TAKE A JOKE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION SAID TODAY IT'S
WILLING TO PAY THE BILLION
DOLLAR PRICE TAG FOR A NEW
MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEM THE U.S.
IS DEPLOYING IN SOUTH KOREA, BUT
THAT THE DEAL COULD BE
RENEGOTIATED.
FOR NOW, NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISER H. R. McMASTER TOLD HIS
SOUTH KOREAN COUNTERPART IN A
PHONE CALL, THE U.S. WILL HONOR
THE AGREEMENT REACHED DURING THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
JUST THREE DAYS AGO, PRESIDENT
TRUMP SAID HE WANTED SOUTH KOREA
TO FOOT THE BILL FOR THE"
TERMINAL HIGH-ALTITUDE AREA
DEFENSE SYSTEM," KNOWN AS"
THAAD."
HUNDREDS OF RESIDENTS FROM THE
VILLAGE WHERE THE THAAD MISSILE
DEFENSE SYSTEM WILL BE DEPLOYED
PROTESTED THE INSTALLATION.
THEY BLOCKED ARMY TRUCKS FROM
ENTERING THE SITE.
FILIPINO PRESIDENT RODRIGO
DUTERTE, WHO PUBLICLY URGED
PRESIDENT TRUMP YESTERDAY TO
SHOW RESTRAINT IN DEALING WITH
NORTH KOREA, HAS BEEN INVITED TO
THE WHITE HOUSE.
MISTER TRUMP INVITED DUTERTE
DURING A PHONE CALL YESTERDAY IN
WHICH THEY DISCUSSED SECURITY
CONCERNS IN ASIA AND DUTERTE'S
CONTROVERSIAL CRACKDOWN ON
ILLEGAL DRUGS.
SINCE DUTERTE TOOK OFFICE TEN
MONTHS AGO, THOUSANDS OF
SUSPECTED DRUG DEALERS AND USERS
HAVE BEEN MURDERED IN EXTRA-
JUDICIAL KILLINGS.
A DUTERTE SPOKESMAN SAID MISTER
TRUMP WANTS TO DEVELOP A, "WARM,
WORKING RELATIONSHIP."
THE WHITE HOUSE DESCRIBED THE
CALL AS "VERY FRIENDLY."
NO DATE IS SET FOR THE VISIT.
IN CANTON, TEXAS, 50 MILES EAST
OF DALLAS, SEARCH TEAMS TODAY
COMBED THROUGH THE RUINS OF
HOMES DESTROYED BY TORNADOES.
THE SEVERE STORMS YESTERDAY
KILLED AT LEAST FIVE PEOPLE AND
INJURED MORE THAN 50 RESIDENTS.
THE MAYOR CALLED THE DAMAGE"
HEARTBREAKING" AND SAID THE
TOWN WAS CAUGHT IN A PATH OF
DESTRUCTION 35 MILES LONG AND 15
MILES WIDE.
SHORTLY AFTER PRESIDENT TRUMP
TOOK OFFICE, IMMIGRATION AND
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT, KNOWN AS"
ICE," BEGAN ARRESTING HUNDREDS
OF IMMIGRANTS IN VERY VISIBLE
RAIDS ACROSS THE UNITED STATES.
BUT AS INTERNAL ICE DOCUMENTS
OBTAINED FIRST BY "THE
WASHINGTON POST" SHOW, HALF OF
THOSE DETAINED HAD EITHER NO
CRIMINAL RECORD OR TRAFFIC
CONVICTIONS.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
TO DISCUSS THIS IS ONE THE
REPORTERS WHO BROKE THIS STORY,
MARIA SACCHETTI.
YOU HAVE A SET OF DATA THIS IS
AROUND OPERATION CROSSCHECK
WHICH IS ONE OF THE THINGS WE
ALL HEARD ABOUT.
WHAT DID THE DATA REVEAL AND HOW
DOES THAT WORK WITH ALL OF THE
LARGER ROUNDUPS THAT HAVE BEEN
HAPPENING?
>> WELL, THE DATA OFFERED THE
FIRST LOOK AT A BREAKDOWN OF THE
IMMIGRATION RAID THAT OCCURRED
RIGHT AFTER PRESIDENT TRUMP TOOK
OFFICE.
AND THE WAY ICE CLASSIFIED IT IS
TRAFFIC OFFENSES, BUT WE ASKED
FOR MORE INFORMATION.
AND THEY SAID THAT MORE THAN 90%
OF THOSE OFFENSES WERE DRUNK
DRIVING OFFENSES.
>> Sreenivasan: I DON'T WANT
TO MINIMIZE DRUNK DRIVING AS NOT
A SERIOUS OFFENSE BUT WHAT ABOUT
THE CRIMINALS, MURDERERS AND SO
FORTH, THAT THE PRESIDENT SAID
THAT WAS THE FOCUS, THAT IS WHO
HE WANTED TO GO AFTER.
>> EXACTLY.
AND WE KNOW THERE ARE HUNDREDS
OF THOSE FOLKS WHO ARE OUT
THERE, WHO WERE RELEASED, WHO
WERE RELEASED UNDER THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION.
AND TRUMP VERY CLEARLY MADE THAT
A PRIORITY.
HE SAID WHAT HAPPENED UNDER THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION WOULD NOT
HAPPEN UNDER HIS ADMINISTRATION.
AND WE JUST HAVEN'T SEEN THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WHAT HAS BEEN
HAPPENING AND WHAT WAS ON THE
BOOKS IN TERMS OF REGULATIONS OR
RESTRICTIONS THAT THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAD PUT ON I.C.E.
ENFORCEMENT AND HOW THEY SHOULD
PRIORITIZE WHO TO ROUND UP AND
DEPORT?
>> WELL, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION, WE'VE REPORTED
THIS, DEPORTED A LOT OF PEOPLE
WHO HAD NEVER COMMITTED A CRIME,
GOT A LOT OF CRITICISM FOR DOING
THAT AND OVER TIME, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION ISSUED MEMOS THAT
SOUGHT TO CURTAIL EXACTLY THE
TYPES OF FOLKS IMMIGRATION
OFFICIALS COULD ARREST AND
DEPORT.
AND IN 2014, LATE 2014, THAT
REALLY TOOK AFFECT.
YOU CAN SEE THE NUMBER OF
NON-CRIMINALS, AND OVERALL
DEPORTATIONS GOING DOWN THE LAST
COUPLE OF NEARS WITH HIS
ADMINISTRATION.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A
CHILLING EFFECT IN TERMS OF
PEOPLE THAT ARE COMING FORWARD,
SAY WHISTLE-BLOWERS OR WITNESSES
TO CRIMES OR MAYBE EVEN VICTIMS
FOR FEAR THAT THEY WILL BE
DEPORTED IN THE PROCESS?
>> WELL, AT LEAST TWO CITIES,
LOS ANGELES AND HOUSTON HAVE
REPORTED THAT THEY ARE SEEING
FEWER CRIMES, PARTICULARLY
SEXUAL ASSAULTS AN OTHER CRIMES
BEING REPORTED BY LATINOS.
SO THAT IS A BIG QUESTION.
AND THE O BAD-- THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION HAS SAID THAT THE
VICTIMS OR WITNESSES COULD BE
PICKED UP.
THEY SAID THEY'RE NOT THE
PRIORITY, THAT THERE ARE STILL
PROTECTIONS IN PLACE FOR THEM
BUT IF THEY'RE LAWBREAKERS OR
HAVE HAD AN ISSUE IN THE PAST,
VICTIMS AND WITNESSES COULD ALSO
BE DETAINED.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THERE ARE
TWO STEPS.
THERE IS THE DETENTION PART AND
THE DEPORTATION PART.
IS EVERYBODY GETTING DETAINED
BEING DEPORTED.
ARE THE COUNTRIES AGREEING TO
TAKE THEM BACK?
>> SO ONE REALLY IMPORTANT
DETAIL HERE IS THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN IMMIGRATION SYSTEM AND
THE CRIMINAL SYSTEM, IN THE
CRIMINAL SYSTEM WE KNOW WHO GETS
ARRESTED.
WHEN SOMEONE IS ARRESTED, THE
NEXT THING YOU SEE IS THEIR NAME
AND A LITTLE BACKGROUND ABOUT
THEM.
THE IMMIGRATION SYSTEM HAS NOT
WORKED THAT WAY.
WE DON'T KNOW WHO IS GETTING
ARRESTED.
WE CAN'T LOOK AT THEIR FILES.
CAN'T READ THE REPORTS, AND THE
CHARGES AGAINST THEM EVEN THOUGH
THERE ARE CHARGES.
THEY ARE OFTEN HELD IN THE SAME
TYPES OF JAILS AS CRIMINALS.
BUT THEY'RE VERY LITTLE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTABILITY IN THE
IMMIGRATION SYSTEM.
>> ALL RIGHT, MARIA SACCHETTI OF
"THE WASHINGTON POSTS," THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE NEWS
WEBSITE"
STAT" FOCUSES ON HEALTH,
MEDICINE, AND SCIENCE, AND IN AN
ARTICLE JUST PUBLISHED "STAT"
REPORTS HOW HOSPITALS NATIONWIDE
ARE CUTTING JOBS.
THE REASONS ARE FINANCIAL AND
POLITICAL.
FROM ESCALATING COSTS TO
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT CHANGES TO THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
JOINING ME NOW FROM CLEVELAND TO
DISCUSS ALL THIS IS THE AUTHOR
OF THE STORY, CASEY ROSS.
>> WHERE ARE WE LIKELY TO FEEL
THE IMPACT OF THESE HOSPITALS
CUT, I KNOW YOU LOOKED AT PLACES
ALL OVER THE COUNTRY.
>> YEAH, YOU'RE GOING TO SEE
CUTBACKS IN CLINICAL SERVICES AT
HOSPITALS.
SOME HOSPITALS ARE CHOOSING TO
REDUCE PSYCHIATRIC SERVICES, FOR
EXAMPLE.
A LOT OF HOSPITALS ARE CUTTING
BACK ON OBSTETRIC SERVICES,
CLOSING DOWN LANE AND DELIVERY
UNITS.
IN BOSTON BRIGHAM AND WOMEN'S
HOSPITAL LARGE HARVARD
AFFILIATED TEACHING HOSPITAL
OFFERED A BUYOUT TO 1600
EMPLOYEES, MD ANDERSON IN TEXAS
IS LAYING OFF A THOUSAND.
CATHOLIC HEALTH INITIATIVES ONE
OF THE LARGEST PROVIDERS IN THE
NATION LAID OFF ABOUT A THOUSAND
EMPLOYEES, IN KENTUCKY, IN TEXAS
AND ELSEWHERE.
SO I THINK YOU ARE GOING TO SEE
CUTS IN ALL OF THOSE COMMUNITIES
IN HOSPITALS THAT ARE LARGE AND
SMALL, RURAL OR URBAN.
AND I THINK THE PEOPLE IN THOSE
COMMUNITIES ARE GOING TO SEE
THAT THROUGH A REDUCTION IN SOME
OF THE MEDICAL SERVICES THAT ARE
AVAILABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT WHY NOW?
AND HOW DO WE KNOW THAT THIS
ISN'T JUST SORT OF A BUSINESS
CORRECTION WHERE PERHAPS SOME OF
THE HOSPITALS THAT YOU ARE
LOOKING AT OR FOUND AREN'T JUST
CORRECTING FOR ERRORS THAT THEY
MIGHT HAVE MADE OR JUST BAD
ACCOUNTING.
>> NO, THESE ARE STRUCTURAL
FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE
HEALTH-CARE BUSINESS.
THE BIGGEST PROBLEM IS IS THAT
YOU HAVE A LARGE NUMBER OF
AMERICANS EVERY DAY WHO ARE
AGING INTO MEDICARE.
THE BABY BOOMER POPULATION IS
AGING INTO MEDICARE AT A RATE OF
10,000 PEOPLE A DAY.
AND THAT CAUSES PROBLEMS FOR
HOSPITALS BECAUSE MEDICARE PAYS
LESS THAN COMMERCIAL INSURANCE
DOES FOR MEDICAL SERVICES.
SO YOU HAVE A PROBLEM WHERE
HOSPITALS CAN'T MAKE MONEY ON
THEIR LARGEST POPULATION OF
PATIENTS, WHICH CAUSES MARGINS
TO GET THINNER AND AS THOSE
MARGINS GET THINNER THEY HAVE
LESS LEEWAY TO DEAL WITH SOME OF
THE EVER-RISING COSTS.
>> Sreenivasan: WERE ANY OF
THE HOSPITALS OPTING OUT OR
CREATING A TWO TIER SYSTEM WHERE
A MEDICARE PATIENT MIGHT BE,
WHILE THEY ARE LESS VALUABLE
DOLLARWISE, THEY WOULD MAYBE GET
LESS PREFER RECOMMENDATION
TREATMENT?
>> I THINK THAT IS HAPPENING AT
HOSPITALS ACROSS THE COUNTRY IN
DIFFERENT WAYS.
SELDOM ARE THEY OUT IN THE OPEN
ABOUT THE WAYS IN WHICH THEY DO
THAT.
BUT CERTAINLY THEY FIND WAYS TO
PRIORITIZE COMMERCIALLY INSURED
PATIENTS OVER MEDICARE AND
MEDICAID PATIENTS OFTEN BY
CHOOSING TO LOCATE IN STRATEGIC
LOCATIONS WHERE THEY CAN SERVE
MORE COMMERCIALLY INSURED
PATIENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DOES THE
FIGHT ON CAPITOL HILL PLAY INTO
THIS, ON WHAT COULD HAPPEN TO
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT AND THE
NUMBER OF UNINSURED PEOPLE THAT
MIGHT INCREASE OR DECREASE AND
THE RIPPLE AFFECT IT HAS ON
HOSPITALS.
>> WELL, IT CREATES A LOT OF
UNCERTAINTY.
BECAUSE ALL OF THE HOSPITALS
CERTAINLY ARE CONCERNED ABOUT
THE POTENTIAL LOSS OF 24 BILLION
INSURED PATIENTS OVER THE NEXT
DECADE.
THAT IS THE ESTIMATE OF THE
CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE OF
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE THAT WILL
BECOME UNINSURED IF THE CURRENT
LAW BEING CONSIDERED IN
WASHINGTON IS ENACTED.
SO THOSE HOSPITALS ARE CONCERNED
ABOUT LOSING PAYING CUSTOMERS,
ESSENTIALLY.
THOSE PEOPLE ARE STILL GOING TO
NEED CARE REGARDLESS.
AND THE HOSPITALS ARE WORRIED
THAT THOSE FOLKS ARE NOT GOING
TO BE ABLE TO AFFORD THEIR CARE
BECAUSE THEY ARE NOT GOING TO
HAVE INSURANCE.
THEIR UNCOMPENSATED CARE COSTS
RISE AND THAT PUTS MORE PRESSURE
ON AN ALREADY THIN BOTTOM LINE.
>> Sreenivasan: CASEY ROSS OF
STAT, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> STATE LEGISLATORS IN
TENNESSEE PASSED A BILL THAT
LGBT GROUPS SAY COULD ENCOURAGE
DISCRIMINATION.
READ MORE AT PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE SERENGETI
REGION OF TANZANIA, AFRICAN
ELEPHANTS ROUTINELY GRAZE INTO
FARMERS' CROPS AND DESTROY THE
LIVELIHOOD OF POOR VILLAGES.
BUT WHEN THOSE FARMERS TRY TO
PROTECT THEIR FIELDS, THEY RISK
BEING TRAMPLED TO DEATH BY
ELEPHANTS.
SOMETIMES PEOPLE EVEN KILL
ELEPHANTS IN SELF-DEFENSE.
NOW THERE'S A SURPRISING NEW
METHOD FOR PREVENTING HUMAN
ELEPHANT CONFLICT: DRONES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRISTOPHER
LIVESAY TRAVELED TO TANZANIA TO
SEE WHAT CAN BE DONE TO PROTECT
BOTH THE ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: THE MASSIVE
ELEPHANT FOOTPRINTS ARE STILL
VISIBLE IN KUSEKWA ELIAS'
CORNFIELD.
JUST OUTSIDE SERENGETI NATIONAL
PARK IN RURAL TANZANIA, HE SAYS
AN ELEPHANT PILLAGED THE FIELD
TWO DAYS EARLIER.
>> (translated): THERE IS NO
ANIMAL WE HATE HERE MORE THAN
THE ELEPHANT.
THE ELEPHANTS DESTROY OUR FOOD.
CHILDREN SLEEP HUNGRY.
SOMETIMES YOU CULTIVATE ACRES,
ONLY TO FIND OUT THAT ELEPHANTS
HAVE EATEN THEM ALL.
>> Reporter: TO KEEP ELEPHANTS
SAFELY APART FROM PEOPLE AND
THEIR CROPS, PARK RANGERS ARE
TRAINING WITH REMOTE-CONTROLLED
DRONES A FEW MILES AWAY.
IT SOUNDS LIKE A SWARM OF BEES,
AND THAT'S PRECISELY THE IDEA.
>> SO WE'RE TRYING TO TURN THEM
AROUND AND GET THEM GOING BACK.
THE MATRIARCH IS BEING VIGILANT,
WHILE THE REST LEAVE.
>> Reporter: NATHAN HAHN IS A
RESEARCHER WITH THE AMERICAN
NON-PROFIT "RESOLVE."
IN THIS TRAINING EXERCISE, AN
ELEPHANT STANDS ITS GROUND
AGAINST THE DRONE, BUT QUICKLY
BACKS AWAY.
>> THERE THEY GO.
>> Reporter: FOR MORE THAN TWO
YEARS, HAHN HAS BEEN STUDYING
THE USE OF DRONES TO PREVENT
WHAT'S KNOWN AS HUMAN ELEPHANT
CONFLICT, WHEN ELEPHANTS CROSS
PATHS WITH HUMAN BEINGS.
>> HUMAN-ELEPHANT CONFLICT, IT'S
A BIG PROBLEM ANYWHERE THERE'S
ELEPHANTS AND PEOPLE COEXISTING.
AND IT'S VERY TOUGH TO DEAL
WITH.
ELEPHANTS NEED A LOT OF
RESOURCES AND A LOT OF SPACE TO
MOVE.
AND PEOPLE ALSO NEED THAT SAME
SPACE AND RESOURCES TO DEVELOP
AND GROW ECONOMICALLY.
SO YOU GET THIS BUTTING OF HEADS
AROUND PARK BOUNDARIES WHERE
WILDLIFE IS.
>> Reporter: THE SERENGETI
ECOSYSTEM IN TANZANIA IS MADE UP
OF SERENGETI NATIONAL PARK, AND
A NETWORK OF GAME RESERVES AND
WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT AREAS JUST
OUTSIDE OF IT.
INSIDE THE PARK, THERE ARE CLEAR
RULES MEANT TO PROTECT BOTH
ANIMALS AND HUMANS: FOR
INSTANCE, YOU CAN DRIVE ONLY ON
MARKED ROADS AND MUST STAY IN
YOUR VEHICLE AT ALL TIMES.
BUT JUST OUTSIDE THE PARK IS
ANOTHER STORY.
NOTHING STOPS ANIMALS,
INCLUDING ELEPHANTS, FROM
WANDERING INTO AREAS WHERE
PEOPLE LIVE.
WHILE THE AFRICAN ELEPHANT
POPULATION HAS FALLEN 30% OVER
THE LAST DECADE, THE ELEPHANT
POPULATION HAS INCREASED IN THE
SERENGETI THANKS IN PART TO
ANTI-POACHING EFFORTS.
SINCE 2006, THE NUMBER OF
ELEPHANTS IS UP MORE THAN 250%.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE HUMAN
POPULATION HAS ALSO GROWN,
INCREASING MORE THAN 50% SINCE
2002.
>> REGARDING THE HABITAT, BEING
ALSO VERY OBSERVANT.
>> Reporter: JULIUS KEYYU IS THE
DIRECTOR OF RESEARCH AT THE
TANZANIA WILDLIFE RESEARCH
INSTITUTE, A GOVERNMENT AGENCY.
>> THE INCREASE IN HUMAN
POPULATION HAS RESULTED IN
DEMAND FOR MORE LAND FOR HUMAN
SETTLEMENT, FOR CULTIVATION, FOR
LIVESTOCK GRAZING.
>> Reporter: SO BOTH PEOPLE AND
ELEPHANTS ARE FIGHTING OVER THE
SAME NATURAL RESOURCES?
>> NATURAL RESOURCES.
BECAUSE IT IS BECOMING SCARCE,
BECAUSE OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
SO YOU SEE WILDLIFE, PEOPLE,
LIVESTOCK ARE SHARING WATER
RESOURCES.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S CREATED
A GREATER LIKELIHOOD OF
CONFLICT.
FARMER MBESI NDONGO SAYS AN
ELEPHANT NEARLY KILLED HIM A
YEAR AND A HALF AGO.
>> (translated): THE ELEPHANT
WAS HIDING IN THE FOREST AND
CAME SUDDENLY AND KNOCKED ME
DOWN ON MY HEAD.
I PICKED MYSELF UP, BUT IT
PULLED ME BACK WITH ITS TRUNK
AND THREW ME.
I KNEW THAT BY THE TIME IT WOULD
BE DONE WITH ME I WOULD BE DEAD.
BUT I DID NOT WANT TO DIE
WITHOUT FIGHTING.
>> Reporter: THE ATTACK LEFT HIM
WITH A FRACTURED SKULL AND
WRIST.
HE STILL SUFFERS FROM PAIN
TODAY, AND CAN NO LONGER FARM,
SO HE HAS TROUBLE SUPPORTING HIS
FAMILY.
>> (translated): IT HAS REALLY
AFFECTED MY LIFE, BECAUSE I
CANNOT PERFORM DUTIES THAT
REQUIRE A LOT OF ENERGY.
ALL THE ENERGY I HAD IS GONE.
>> Reporter: VETERINARIAN AND
ANIMAL PROTECTION SPECIALIST
NICK DE SOUZA SAYS DESTRUCTION
CAUSED BY ELEPHANTS CAN LEAD
PEOPLE TO VIOLENTLY RETALIATE.
>> THIS COULD BE A SPEAR, BOW
AND ARROW; SLINGSHOTS ARE USED A
LOT.
UNFORTUNATELY, THE WORST OF ALL
IS THE USE OF POISONS.
>> Reporter: DE SOUZA HAS WORKED
FOR CONSERVATION GROUPS FOR THE
PAST 15 YEARS
>> THE CONSEQUENCES ARE
APPALLING.
YOU FIND BOTH DEAD AND DYING
ANIMALS IN QUITE LARGE NUMBERS
THAT CROSS CUT ACROSS THE WHOLE
FAMILY SPECTRUM, FROM TINY
BABIES, TO GRANDMOTHERS.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE NO
RELIABLE NUMBERS ON HOW MANY
ELEPHANTS PEOPLE KILL IN SELF-
DEFENSE OR RETALIATION AROUND
THE WORLD, BUT CONSERVATIONISTS
BELIEVE THE PROBLEM IS GETTING
WORSE.
DE SOUZA SAYS HUMAN ELEPHANT
CONFLICT OCCURS EVERYWHERE
ELEPHANTS LIVE IN THE WILD NEAR
HUMAN SETTLEMENTS.
WITH DEADLY CONSEQUENCES FOR
BOTH ELEPHANTS AND HUMANS.
FROM SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA TO
INDONESIA, TO INDIA, ELEPHANTS
KILL HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE EVERY
YEAR.
>> WHAT'S REALLY THE CHALLENGE
IS THAT THE POPULATION THAT CO-
EXISTS WITH ELEPHANTS ARE THE
MOST MARGINALIZED COMMUNITIES ON
EARTH.
>> Reporter: IN THOSE
COMMUNITIES, THERE ARE A VARIETY
OF OLD-FASHIONED METHODS FOR
PREVENTING ELEPHANT
INCURSIONS...
...SCARING THEM OFF WITH LOUD
NOISES AND FLASHING LIGHTS, AS
THESE RURAL TANZANIANS
DEMONSTRATED.
...SURROUNDING CROPS WITH FENCES
COVERED IN HOT CHILI OIL, WHICH
TORMENT ELEPHANTS' SENSITIVE
TRUNKS.
AND RANGERS CHARGING AT THEM
WITH VEHICLES OR USING GUNS.
>> THEY'LL ACTUALLY FIRE LIVE
ROUNDS INTO THE AIR, AND THAT'LL
SOMETIMES SCARE THE ELEPHANTS
AWAY.
>> Reporter: MANY OF THOSE
TACTICS CAN PUT HUMANS
DANGEROUSLY CLOSE TO AN
ELEPHANT, BUT WILDLIFE RANGER
RAINLEY MBAWALA SAYS THE NEWEST
METHOD OF USING DRONES IS MUCH
LESS RISKY.
>> (translated): WHEN YOU USE
A GUN, SOMETIMES THE ELEPHANT
CHARGES BACK, OR YOU MAY FIRE A
GUN AND END UP FIRING AT A
VILLAGER ACCIDENTALLY.
BUT THE DRONE HAS NO BAD
EFFECTS, BECAUSE EVEN WHEN THE
ELEPHANT CHARGES, NOBODY IS
CAUGHT IN BETWEEN.
>> Reporter: OVER TIME,
ELEPHANTS OFTEN OUTSMART
CONFLICT MITIGATION TOOLS ONCE
THEY GET USED TO THEM. BUT
RESEARCHERS SAY, SO FAR,
ELEPHANTS HAVEN'T CAUGHT ONTO
DRONES.
THE BREAKTHROUGH OF USING DRONES
CAME A FEW YEARS AGO WHEN
RESEARCHERS WERE TAKING AERIAL
PHOTOS OF ELEPHANTS AND MADE A
SURPRISING DISCOVERY.
>> WELL, IT TURNS OUT THEY'RE
VERY SCARED OF THE DRONES.
THEY WOULD RUN AWAY ALMOST
INSTANTLY AND SEEM TO BE VERY
FRIGHTENED.
WE'RE NOT SURE WHY-- IT COULD BE
IT SOUNDS LIKE A SWARM OF BEES.
THERE'S LOTS OF FLASHING LIGHTS.
IT'S THIS BIG, WHITE OBJECT
COMING AT THEM VERY CLOSELY.
>> Reporter: THERE WAS A SORT OF
UNINTENDED BENEFIT?
>> YOU THINK YOU'RE USING A
DRONE JUST TO FILM SOME
ELEPHANTS, AND ALL OF A SUDDEN
YOU'VE DISCOVERED THIS NEW WAY
TO DEAL WITH HUMAN-ELEPHANT
CONFLICT.
>> Reporter: HAHN AND HIS
RESEARCH GROUP NOW TRAIN
SERENGETI PARK RANGERS TO USE
THE DRONES AND COLLECT DATA TO
MEASURE THEIR EFFECTIVENESS.
IN 2016, HAHN AND JULIUS KEYYU
CO-AUTHORED A STUDY OF 51
INSTANCES IN WHICH DRONES WERE
DEPLOYED.
>> IF IT IS USED PROPERLY AND
PROPERLY MANEUVERED, THE DRONE
IS 100%.
>> Reporter: 100% EFFECTIVE.
>> 100% EFFECTIVE TO FLUSH
ELEPHANTS OUT OF A CROP FIELD
OR, IF I'M CALLED WITH THE
FARMERS, THAT ELEPHANTS ARE
COMING TO MY FARM, TO DRIVE THEM
BACK.
>> I JUST NEED TO LAND.
>> Reporter: OF COURSE, THE
DRONES HAVE LIMITATIONS.
>> THE WIND IS TOO STRONG!
>> Reporter: THEY DON'T WORK IN
HIGH WINDS AND RAIN.
>> WHOOO!
>> Reporter: THEY'RE ALSO HARDER
TO USE AT NIGHT, WHEN MOST
ELEPHANTS RAID CROPS, SO RANGERS
NEED TO USE THEM IN TANDEM WITH
A STRONG SPOTLIGHT.
AND DRONES ARE OF NO USE IF
RANGERS CAN'T ARRIVE TO DEPLOY
THEM, AS WE SAW DURING A NIGHT
PATROL THE RANGERS ALLOWED US TO
JOIN.
ON THIS NIGHT THERE'S NOT A
SINGLE VEHICLE ON HAND, SO
RANGERS ARE LIMITED TO WHAT THEY
CAN COVER BY FOOT.
IF A FARMER CALLS TO REPORT AN
ELEPHANT THREAT JUST A FEW MILES
AWAY, THEY'RE ON THEIR OWN.
SERENGETI DISTRICT GAME OFFICER
JOHN LENDOYAN OVERSEES THE
REGION.
HE'S NOT YET CONVINCED THAT
DRONES CAN BE EFFECTIVE AND SAYS
THAT AT ROUGHLY $800 DOLLARS PER
DRONE, HE HAS MORE PRESSING
PRIORITIES.
>> (translated): THE ISSUE OF
HUMAN/ELEPHANT CONFLICT IS
SOMETIMES VERY DIFFICULT FOR US
TO ADDRESS BECAUSE OF LACK OF
RESOURCES.
INCLUDING PEOPLE, VEHICLES, AND
AT TIMES, FUEL.
SO IMPLEMENTING THESE NEW
TECHNIQUES IS DIFFICULT.
>> Reporter: LENDOYAN IS FOCUSED
ON EDUCATING PEOPLE TO AVOID
ELEPHANT HABITATS AND TO
APPRECIATE THE VALUE THEY BRING
TO THE COUNTRY'S TOURISM
INDUSTRY.
>> (translated): THE
GOVERNMENT HAS TRIED TO CREATE
AN ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH THE
VILLAGERS CAN BENEFIT FROM THE
CONSERVATION PROCESS.
THE DAILY FEES FROM THE PARKS,
AND THESE FUNDS ARE USUALLY
CHANNELED BACK TO THE PUBLIC
THROUGH DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
>> Reporter: THE GOVERNMENT DOES
PAY DAMAGES TO PEOPLE WHO ARE
INJURED OR LOSE CROPS BECAUSE OF
ELEPHANTS, BUT MANY FARMERS WE
MET WITH, INCLUDING KUSEKWA
ELIAS, WHOSE CORNFIELD WAS
PILLAGED, SAY ELEPHANTS ARE THE
GOVERNMENT'S REAL PRIORITY.
>> (translated): FROM THE WAY
WE SEE IT, ELEPHANTS ARE MORE
VALUABLE THAN HUMANS, SINCE THEY
CAN DESTROY OUR CROPS, AND
NOTHING IS DONE.
>> Reporter: FOR NOW, HAHN AND
HIS GROUP "RESOLVE" ARE DONATING
DRONES TO THE RANGERS, THOUGH
THEY HOPE TANZANIA WILL
EVENTUALLY PAY FOR THEM.
RESOLVE IS ALSO WORKING WITH THE
GOVERNMENT TO TRY AND FIND
LONGER-TERM SOLUTIONS.
>> IT CAN DEFINITELY BE
DESCRIBED AS A REACTIVE
SOLUTION.
BUT IN THE END, IT'S WHAT'S
NEEDED RIGHT NOW.
THAT'S HOW WE LOOK AT DRONES.
>> Sreenivasan: THE EAST AFRICAN
NATION OF SOUTH SUDAN IS
EMBROILED IN A CIVIL WAR THAT
HAS LED TO A MAN-MADE FAMINE.
AND ACCORDING TO THE UNITED
NATIONS, THIS HAS PUT 100-
THOUSAND PEOPLE AT IMMEDIATE
RISK OF STARVATION.
TOMORROW, "THE NEWSHOUR" BEGINS
AIRING A THREE-PART SERIES ON
THE CRISIS FROM SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT JANE FERGUSON, WHO
LOOKS INTO THE REPORTS OF ETHNIC
CLEANSING BY GOVERNMENT
SOLDIERS.
I SAW MANY PEOPLE KILLED
INCLUDING MY BROTHER.
THEY CALLED PIE BROTHER TO COME
OUT OF THE HOUSE AND SHOT HIM IN
FRONT OF ME.
>> THE U.N. SAID IN DECEMBER IN
A STATEMENT, SOUTH SUDAN IS ON
THE BRINK OF ALL OUT GENOCIDE
AND YET ITS PEACE KEEPERS SEEM
UNWILLING OR UNABLE TO STOP IT.
LAST YEAR GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS
FORCED THEIR WAY INTO THE CAMP,
AND OVER SEVERAL DAYS MURDERED
MORE THAN 25 PEOPLE, AND INJURED
AND RAPED MANY OTHERS.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, FLORIDA
CONGRESSWOMAN ILEANA ROS-
LEHTINEN ANNOUNCED THAT SHE
PLANS TO RETIRE.
SHE IS THE FIRST HISPANIC WOMAN
AND FIRST CUBAN-AMERICAN EVER
ELECTED TO THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
THE REPUBLICAN WON HER SEAT IN
1989 AND LATER BECAME THE FIRST
WOMAN TO CHAIR A STANDING
COMMITTEE, THE HOUSE COMMITTEE
ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS.
THE HAVANA-BORN ROS-LEHTINEN
CAME TO MIAMI WHEN SHE WAS EIGHT
AND DIDN'T SPEAK ENGLISH.
THE 64-YEAR-OLD LAWMAKER SAYS,
"IT'S TIME TO TAKE A NEW STEP."
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF"
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.